---
layout: post
title:  "Tech culture: Behaviors vs Behaviees"
date:   2019-03-07
---

Quartz had an interesting article on digital identity. ([Your digital identity has three layers, and you can only protect one of them](https://qz.com/1525661/your-digital-identity-has-three-layers-and-you-can-only-protect-one-of-them/)). I recommend perusing their [giant graphic](https://panoptykon.org/sites/default/files/3levels.png) to get the idea. It's a well-intentioned model but kind of flawed - for example, I don't see a meaningful distinction between the inner 2 layers. Behavioral metadata IS behavioral data. Your words convey information, but so does your body language and facial expressions, down to the smallest facial micro-ticks. For someone watching you talk, what good does it do to tease apart the two bundled sources of meaning? They're better off asking questions about your intentions and motivations, and the possible effects and side-effects of your words.

*Tenuous physics analogy incoming*. Niels Bohr's toy "solar system" model for the atom predicted some of the spacings between electron energy levels. It didn't explain the fine splits in spectral bands caused by relativity and spin. But even worse, it seemed to break down in situations where you have more than one atom in assemblage (i.e. reality). The brilliant Paul Dirac had to flip autisto-batically into the scene and perform second quantization, which normalizes each energy level by considering permutations of all other levels in the neighboring atoms. One key component is the invention of creation/annihilation operators to add or remove particles from a system.
  
If we can change the question from "Who's producing what information?" To "How many people are in each information-producing state?", then my physics analogy is airtight.

Digital identity isn't a unidirectional thing where you leave some behavioral footprint on the internet. Your thoughts and behaviors get affected by your info consumption, and the system you're embedded in. Anyone using Reddit has seen extensive narrative-shaping by the moderators and admins. The biggest news aggregators are guildy of [blind and overexuberant sanitization](https://www.engadget.com/2019/01/31/sex-censorship-killed-internet-fosta-sesta/) of content. Facebook facilitates highly tailored mindfucks (a la Cambridge Analytica) and also carries out more insidious soft-censorship, even though most users assume their news feed is a simple queue of all stories and links.

China's great techno-dystopian success has been using technology to identify antisocial behavior, and telling [millions of bumpkins](https://www.sciencealert.com/china-has-a-credit-system-for-social-behavior-its-led-to-millions-of-travel-bans) that they're not allowed to travel publicly anymore. It seems messed up if these people really didn't understand the social graces that they violated. But what if they're the pathological solipsistic types who see the anonymity of modern society as a "do-whatever-I-want" pass? I'm thinking of aggressive and dangerous drivers; litterers; bathroom-wall waste-smearers. Maybe a social credit system isn't so bad. Give them a warning or two, then blacklist their asses.

Also in China, a Machine Learning model called "Zero Trust" was sent peeking through banking and public records, and got a little TOO good at [identifying corruption](https://www.scmp.com/news/china/science/article/2184857/chinas-corruption-busting-ai-system-zero-trust-being-turned-being), so they had to turn it off. After all, just identifying a corrupt official doesn't mean you have solid evidence, or a clear-cut way forward. But compare this overly effective system with the Pentagon audit (the first-ever, which wrapped up late last year and cost over $400 million just to perform). It was a dismal failure, with tens of billions of dollar worth of equipment unaccounted for, and far more found to be pointless. There is a philosophical framework that explains this pretty well, but that's for another post. From a practical taxpayer standpoint, a "zero trust" type system seems like a good idea to identify sources of waste and crookedness.
